culture shapes what we do and what we
can do in ways that most people find
difficult to talk about difficult to
measure with any accuracy when I was
living in Saskatchewan and in constant
contact with First Nations people with
indigenous Canadians crea jib way some
den a some other groups one of the most
profound unexamined assumptions they had
was that they would meet up with me
later without making any arrangements to
get together you know not deluding
myself on this I realized not everyone
who meets me really wants to be my
friend but quite a few guys and they
were all guys not females all men
they're quite a few guys who met me and
we're really happy to meet me and really
happy to talk to me each time they did
bump into me but you know let's say they
met me once and talked for half an hour
then six months later we happen to see
each other again and they would really
leave those conversations you know happy
never say oh well great you know I'll
see you again soon we've tried to save
them my dude you are not going to see me
again soon if you do not write down my
email and send me an email and make
arrangement to see me you are not going
to see me ever and and those guys
obviously this isn't true of all First
Nations people it's just that experience
I had to get in with those those ethnic
groups in that area on a cultural level
they were really used to being in small
towns where there was maybe only one pub
people would hang out at or you know
keeping all the way real because of
racism there would only be one pub where
First Nations people would hang out at
and boy goddam in Saskatchewan if you
ever get into a taxi and asked to go to
a bar that is known as a place where
indigenous people
hang out who the attitude you get from
the taxi driver the racism of the taxi
drivers unbelievable they all they all
know it the taxi drivers know which bars
white people go to and which bars
indigenous people go to and there's
normally there's no overlap between the
two so much so that you know different
cars people absolutely assumed I was
that are assumed I was First Nations or
that I was married to a First Nations
woman even if I told him wasn't so
because it was still it was so taboo for
a white man to just go and hang out and
some of those places and wide obvious
reason to it was studying the language
of state into politics but that that
kind of cultural assumption oh great
I'll see you later
dude this is not a small town and I
don't really live in this town like you
know I'm here as a student but you are
not gonna see me later like I want to
talk to you I'm looking forward to
seeing you again too but you have to
actually make Richmond and culturally
anyway those guys the guys are you think
never shook it up anyway they themselves
joke about some of those some of those
cultural differences and not others
understandably so anyway for me I was
introduced to Chinese culture not once
but many many times in my life starting
just growing up in Toronto I know plenty
of Chinese folks around in Toronto but
then later moving to Hong Kong moving to
Taiwan etc but you know I was
reintroduced to Chinese culture to the
real mainland Han Chinese Chinese
culture in a in a remarkable way when I
was kicked out of Laos so the account of
this has been written on on the internet
but I did leave Laos the Lao People's
Democratic Republic with death threats
from government officials in a very
strange political situation and at that
time unexpectedly with nothing but my
backpack in my bicycle I really went as
a refugee from Laos straight up into
you nan China actually I'm simplifying
to say straight up it was a somewhat
somewhat complicated process of
relocating but anyway that contrast was
just remarkable because for me for like
two and a half years I'd really been
living in immersion in the Lao language
and the Lao culture and Lao politics and
now I was suddenly confronted with such
a different culture and different in
subtle but profound ways what is work
what is scholarship what is history what
are our attitudes towards these things
how do they matter to us you know what
is social status on these deep deep
levels of cultural assumptions Chinese
culture was was profoundly different
from Lao culture and even though I knew
that from previously living in Hong Kong
and Taiwan and even living in Toronto
how I felt about it when I went to
Yunnan really changed and I felt
especially in talking to women that when
I went from Laos to you nan I was
suddenly surrounded by geniuses now
that's not because Chinese women are you
know inherently much smarter than the
women from other countries but China
just went through a unique period of
history with the one-child policy where
families were forced to care much more
about women's education than they ever
had historically in the past there are
many many families they only had one kid
if that kid was a daughter then even if
the parents had chauvinistic gender
biased attitudes whatever want to say
they would be forced to put all their
energy and effort into getting that
daughter the best education they could
the best preparation for life that they
could you know even if the family owned
a small shop they would still be
teaching that daughter everything the
daughter needed to know to take over
that shop and historical that was not
the case for China that was a that was a
huge impact of the one-child policy they
were relatively over educated women all
around me and that's a shocking contrast
allows because in Laos
they were just ending
period of history of families having
nine kids and twelve kids and the
government was still encouraging people
to have more than four kids you know the
official government policy was to
encourage families to be large and have
many children and generally Lao culture
put a much much lower emphasis on
education for anyone much lower value on
education and for women perhaps
especially you know didn't have that
senators so that contrast being kicked
out of Laos finding myself suddenly in
Yunnan China and finding that part of
China could mingjing Hong and so on so
different from Southeast Asia but also
so different from Hong Kong or Taiwan in
Kunming I found the level of education
among normal people to be much higher
than it was in Taipei I remarked in that
many times when I was in Taipei I was
encountering illiteracy constantly among
normal people in the city taxi drivers
in Taipei who were illiterate and in
Kunming seemingly even very poor people
were illiterate it was really surprising
to me the attitudes towards history and
politics even though these things are
sensitive in China you know every
culture has a sort of jagged line
between when we're being silly and when
we're being serious and I think one of
the things I really appreciate about
Chinese culture although you know
there's plenty of time to be silly
there's plenty time to be relaxed is
that they reflect my own values in that
mainland Chinese people will switch into
treating things seriously like okay now
we're gonna talk about history now we're
going to talk about politics this is
this is not a game they treat that
seriously and by contrast it can be very
frustrating for me with the British but
even with Americans
I've had many negative experiences of
Americans where they want to treat what
I consider deadly serious matters of
history and politics the very flippant
and childish and insulting attitude
Americans Australians the British you
know and again it's fine it's fine to be
joking around some of the time but now
when the conversation turns to millions
of people dying in the history of
Cambodia or you know whatever the
Holocaust any of these things I really
want to be around people who know how to
treat those topics seriously and I have
found that with the Chinese people who
are culturally Chinese at every level of
education I'm not just talking about
professors in the Universities I did I
didn't spend a lot of time talking
people with PhDs and professors but I I
talked to guys who were ex-military you
know with no formal education or there
were only educated inside the military I
had one friend there memorably who was
an electrician an emergency electrician
so only education being in an electrical
engineering you know so that quality
again it's on a broad unexamined level
of cultural values that I really
appreciate about China and you know here
in Victoria the only people really
willing to talk to me are Chinese even
though I'm living in Canada which is
bizarre just a few days ago in a
bookstore I was looking at books in
Chinese and I started talking to a
Chinese woman a middle-aged Chinese
woman who was there in the same section
and you know she did something that
again Chinese people often do with me at
first she looked at me and was kind of
trying to establish like you know are
you just a ruffian or you a person not
taken seriously and you know I presented
her with my business card and told her a
little bit about my background and then
that switch happens where she's taking
me seriously talking to me as a scholar
or talking to me as an historian and we
stood there and I think we had a
30-minute conversation about history and
politics in that bookstore complete
stranger and she's not a I mean she's
not a traditional academic she's not a
university professor or something I had
a better conversation with her a random
Chinese person in a bookstore that I
have had with any white person at my
university I mean like any any white
student or
I guess I guess you know I have a couple
of white professors who have had
meaningful conversations I got to make
something there but you know the
contrast is amazing and again it's not
that Chinese people are smarter than
other people it really is just on a deep
level of cultural values where the
category of history politics the type of
scholarship I happen to care about they
also culturally take seriously and care
about I had more friends in Kunming than
I ever had in Toronto and when I was
living in could make in the past I
couldn't speak Chinese at all I could I
could count to 10 I could buy things
like I was communicating in English
99% of the time but nevertheless I had
friends there who valued who I was and
what I contribute even though I put it
this way when I was in China I met
Chinese people who really took seriously
and valued like what I knew about
Cambodia more than people in Cambodia
did weather was Cambodia Laos but azzam
politics elsewhere you know just that
that sensitivity towards history itself
for me you know it means a lot and in
again I'm it's not false humility I'm
showing up at all these places I have no
PhD I have no meaning my formal
credentials you guys already know I
studied political science University I'm
now getting a second diploma and in
Asian Studies but I mean you know these
are people who you know skeptically
respond to Who I am and what I know and
yet they have that capacity to say okay
this guy is an intellectual or this guy
is a scholar in some sense and you know
they're gonna relate to me in that way
now you know there are terrible things
about China I guess you know to just
name one cultural aspect that to
counterpose to that
one of the scary aspects of Chinese
culture is what I call the the money now
aspect there are a lot of people and
trying to talk to you and they're only
interested in money today and they're
not interested in anything for the
future or long-term cooperation have you
they're interested in what money you can
put on the table right now with no long
term foresight and those are the people
who are going to judge you just on how
expensive your clothing is whether or
not you're wearing expensive jewelry
they want to know your social class
today they want to cut a deal now and
even though that may sound absurd you
can meet people with that attitude
inside a university inside a language
Research Institute inside an archive you
know because I was going to all these
very inside museums you know I was going
to all these institutions where there
really is no money or there's very
little money very little opportunity to
make money but when you meet those
people who are motivated by money it is
true in Chinese culture that is much
more overt and direct and nasty than it
is in British culture by contrast where
that's very much concealed the British
never wants to admit to you that
something is about money but I tell you
what I can take it
you know the rough-and-tumble aspects of
Chinese culture they don't bother me
it's a bit like yeah you know we all
have different advantages and
disadvantages in life in in dealing with
those situations but I mean you know
these things have said I value the real
contrast is just to the ecological
devastation that's around you at all
times
the tragedy of China in 2016 is you
can't breathe the air you can't drink
the water most of the food is not really
safe to eat contagious disease is
terrifying the hospital system is
terrifying if you get sick if you need
help
there are many things about China I am
NOT looking forward to to coping with
but you know that that sense of gravity
that sense of seriousness and the level
of education as a side effect of the
one-child policy or whatever it is
that's tremendously valuable to me and
tremendously meaningful to me and
whenever I deal with the Chinese I feel
a sense of hope for the future that
tragically I never feel in dealing with
white Canadians white english-speaking
Canadians I don't feel that at all I
remember sitting down at the table with
a scholar who was specialized in Tibet
and because she was a specialist in
Tibet she kept saying really nasty
things about China and the Chinese and I
remember you know I let her speak for a
while but then I interrupted her at one
point when she was saying something
basically racist against the Chinese I
said look you know you're saying a lot
of stuff against China but I'm gonna
tell you one thing right now
that for me carries more weight than all
the things you've complained about and
you know if she was listening to the
Chinese read books
the Chinese read books and the care
about history and for that reason alone
whenever I deal with China and the
Chinese despite all the terrible
problems their history all the problems
of ecology all the problems in that
economy in that culture I have hope for
the future